“That will bring somebody.”

And so it did. A little old man appeared at a window
with a night-cap on his head and called to him angrily:

“What do you want at such an hour?”

“Would you be kind enough to give me a little bread?”

“Wait there, I will be back directly,” said the little old
man, thinking it was one of those rascally boys who amuse
themselves at night by ringing the house-bells to rouse re-
spectable people who are sleeping quietly.

After half a minute the window was again opened and the
voice of the same little old man shouted to Pinocchio:

“Come underneath and hold out your cap.”

Pinocchio pulled off his cap; but, just as he held it out,
an enormous basin of water was poured down on him, soak-
ing him from head to foot as if he had been a pot of dried-up
geraniums.
And the noise he made in falling was as if a sack of
wooden ladles had been thrown from a fifth story.

“Open the door!” shouted Geppetto from the street.

“Dear papa, I cannot,” answered the puppet, crying
and rolling about on the ground.

“Why can’t you?”

“Because my feet have been eaten.”

“And who has eaten your feet?”
_ “The cat,” said Pinocchio, seeing the cat, who was amus-
ing herself by making some shavings dance with her forepaws.

“Open the door, I tell you!” repeated Geppetto. “If
you don’t, when I get into the house you shall have the cat
from me!”

“I cannot stand up, believe me. Oh, poor me! poor me!
I shall have to walk on my knees for the rest of my life!”
Geppetto, believing that all this lamentation was only
another of the puppet’s tricks, thought of a means of putting
an end to it, and, climbing up the wall, he got in at the window.

He was very angry and at first he did nothing but scold;
but when he saw his Pinocchio lying on the ground and really
without feet he was quite overcome. He took him in his arms
and began to kiss and caress him, and to say a thousand
endearing things to him, and as the big tears ran down his
cheeks he said, sobbing:

“My little Pinocchio! how did you manage to burn your
feet?”

“I don’t know, papa, but it has been such a dreadful night
that I shall remember it as long as I live. It thundered
“I don’t know, papa, but it has been such a dreadful night
that I shall remember it as long as I live. It thundered
and lightened, and I was very hungry, and then the Talking-
Cricket said to me: ‘It serves you right; you have been
wicked and you deserve it,’ and I said to him: ‘Take care,
Cricket!’ and he said: ‘You are a puppet and you have a
wooden head,’ and I threw the handle of a hammer at him,
and he died, but the fault was his, for I didn’t wish to kill
him, and the proof of it is that I put an earthenware saucer
on a brazier of burning embers, but a chicken flew out and
said: ‘Adieu until we meet again, and many compliments to
all at home’: and I got still more hungry, for which reason
that little old man in a night-cap, opening the window, said
to me: ‘Come underneath and hold out your hat,’ and poured
a basinful of water on my head, because asking for a little
bread isn’t a disgrace, is it? and I returned home at once, and
Geppetto, who from all this jumbled account had only
understood one thing, which was that the puppet was dying
of hunger, drew from his pocket three pears and, giving them
to him, said:

“These three pears were intended for my breakfast, but
I will give them to you willingly. Eat them, and I hope
they will do you good.”

“If you wish me to eat them, be kind enough to peel
them for me.”

“Peel them?” said Geppetto, astonished. “I should never
have thought, my boy, that you were so dainty and fastidious.
That is bad! In this world we should accustom ourselves
from childhood to like and to eat everything, for there is no
saying to what we may be brought. There are so many
chances!”
O sooner had the puppet satisfied his hunger than he began

to ery and to grumble because he wanted a pair of
new feet.

But Geppetto, to punish him for his naughtiness, allowed
him to cry and to despair for half the day. He then said
to him:

“Why should I make you new feet? To enable you,
perhaps, to escape again from home?”

“T promise you,” said the puppet, sobbing, “that for the
future I will be good.”

“All boys,” replied Geppetto, “when they are bent upon
obtaining something, say the same thing.”
“But to go to school I shall want some clothes.”

Geppetto, who was poor and who had not so much as a
penny in his pocket, then made him a little dress of flowered
paper, a pair of shoes from the bark of a tree, and a cap
of the crumb of bread.

Pinocchio ran immediately to look at himself in a crock
of water, and he was so pleased with his appearance that he
said, strutting about like a peacock:

“TI look quite like a gentleman!”

“Yes, indeed,” answered Geppetto, “for bear in mind
that it is not fine clothes that make the gentleman, but rather
clean clothes.”
All at once Harlequin stopped short and, turning to the
public, he pointed with his hand to some one far down in
the pit and exclaimed in a dramatic tone:

“Gods of the firmament! Do I dream or am I awake?
But surely that is Pinocchio!”

“It is indeed Pinocchio!” cried Punch.

“It is indeed himself!” screamed Miss Rose, peeping from
behind the scenes.

“It is Pinocchio! it is Pinocchio!” shouted all the puppets
in chorus, leaping from all sides on to the stage. “It is
Pinocchio! It is our brother Pinocchio! Long live Pinocchio!”

“Pinocchio, come up here to me,” cried Harlequin, “and
throw yourself into the arms of your wooden brothers!”

At this affectionate invitation Pinocchio made a leap from
the end of the pit into the reserved seats; another leap landed
him on the head of the leader of the orchestra, and he then
sprang upon the stage.

The embraces, the friendly pinches, and the demonstra-
tions of warm brotherly affection that Pinocchio received from
the excited crowd of actors and actresses of the puppet dra-
matic company are beyond description.

The sight was doubtless a moving one, but the public in
the pit, finding that the play was stopped, became impatient
and began to shout: “We will have the play—go on with
the play!”

It was all breath thrown away. The puppets, instead of
continuing the recital, redoubled their noise and outcries, and,
putting Pinocchio on their shoulders, they carried him in tri-
umph before the footlights.
At that moment out came the showman. He was very
big, and so ugly that the sight of him was enough to frighten
anyone. His beard was as black as ink, and so long that it
reached from his chin to the ground. I need only say that
he trod upon it when he walked. His mouth was as big as
an oven, and his eyes were like two lanterns of red glass with
lights burning inside them. He carried a large whip made of
snakes and foxes’ tails twisted together, which he cracked
constantly.

At his unexpected appearance there was a profound silence:
no one dared to breathe. A fly might have been heard in the
stillness. The poor puppets of both sexes trembled like so
many leaves. :

“Why have you come to raise a disturbance in my theater?”
asked the showman of Pinocchio, in the gruff voice of a hob-
goblin suffering from a severe cold in the head.

“Believe me, honored sir, it was not my fault!”
