Canon Alberic's Scrap-Book

by M.R. James

St Bertrand de Comminges is a decayed town on the spurs of the
Pyrenees, not very far from Toulouse, and still nearer to Bagnères-de
Luchon. It was the site of a bishopric until the Revolution, and has a
cathedral which is visited by a certain number of tourists. In the spring
of 1883 an Englishman arrived at this old-world place--I can hardly
dignify it with the name of city, for there are not a thousand
inhabitants. He was a Cambridge man, who had come specially from
Toulouse to see St Bertrand's Church, and had left two friends, who
were less keen archaeologists than himself, in their hotel at Toulouse,
under promise to join him on the following morning. Half an hour at
the church would satisfy them, and all three could then pursue their
journey in the direction of Auch. But our Englishman had come early
on the day in question, and proposed to himself to fill a note-book and
to use several dozens of plates in the process of describing and
photographing every corner of the wonderful church that dominates
the little hill of Comminges. In order to carry out this design
satisfactorily, it was necessary to monopolize the verger of the church
for the day. The verger or sacristan (I prefer the latter appellation,
inaccurate as it may be) was accordingly sent for by the somewhat
brusque lady who keeps the inn of the Chapeau Rouge; and when he
came, the Englishman found him an unexpectedly interesting object of
study. It was not in the personal appearance of the little, dry, wizened
old man that the interest lay, for he was precisely like dozens of other
church-guardians in France, but in a curious furtive or rather hunted
and oppressed air which he had. He was perpetually half glancing
behind him; the muscles of his back and shoulders seemed to be
hunched in a continual nervous contraction, as if he were expecting
every moment to find himself in the clutch of an enemy. The
Englishman hardly knew whether to put him down as a man haunted
by a fixed delusion, or as one oppressed by a guilty conscience, or as
an unbearably henpecked husband. The probabilities, when reckoned
up, certainly pointed to the last idea; but, still, the impression
conveyed was that of a more formidable persecutor even than a
termagant wife.

However, the Englishman (let us call him Dennistoun) was soon too
deep in his note-book and too busy with his camera to give more than
an occasional glance to the sacristan. Whenever he did look at him, he
found him at no great distance, either huddling himself back against
the wall or crouching in one of the gorgeous stalls. Dennistoun
became rather fidgety after a time. Mingled suspicions that he was
keeping the old man from his déjeuner, that he was regarded as likely
to make away with St Bertrand's ivory crozier, or with the dusty
stuffed crocodile that hangs over the font, began to torment him.

'Won't you go home?' he said at last; 'I'm quite well able to finish my
notes alone; you can lock me in if you like. I shall want at least two
hours more here, and it must be cold for you, isn't it?'

'Good heavens!' said the little man, whom the suggestion seemed to
throw into a state of unaccountable terror, 'such a thing cannot be
thought of for a moment. Leave monsieur alone in the church? No, no;
two hours, three hours, all will be the same to me. I have breakfasted,
I am not at all cold, with many thanks to monsieur.'

'Very well, my little man,' quoth Dennistoun to himself: 'you have
been warned, and you must take the consequences.'
Before the expiration of the two hours, the stalls, the enormous
dilapidated organ, the choir-screen of Bishop John de Mauléon, the
remnants of glass and tapestry, and the objects in the treasurechamber had been well and truly examined; the sacristan still keeping
at Dennistoun's heels, and every now and then whipping round as if he
had been stung, when one or other of the strange noises that trouble a
large empty building fell on his ear. Curious noises they were,
sometimes.

'Once,' Dennistoun said to me, 'I could have sworn I heard a thin
metallic voice laughing high up in the tower. I darted an inquiring
glance at my sacristan. He was white to the lips. "It is he--that is--it is
no one; the door is locked," was all he said, and we looked at each
other for a full minute.'

Another little incident puzzled Dennistoun a good deal. He was
examining a large dark picture that hangs behind the altar, one of a
series illustrating the miracles of St Bertrand. The composition of the
picture is well-nigh indecipherable, but there is a Latin legend below,
which runs thus: 
Qualiter S. Bertrandus liberavit hominem quem diabolus diu volebat
strangulare. (How St Bertrand delivered a man whom the Devil long
sought to strangle.)

Dennistoun was turning to the sacristan with a smile and a jocular
remark of some sort on his lips, but he was confounded to see the old
man on his knees, gazing at the picture with the eye of a suppliant in
agony, his hands tightly clasped, and a rain of tears on his cheeks.
Dennistoun naturally pretended to have noticed nothing, but the
question would not go away from him,'Why should a daub of this kind
affect anyone so strongly?' He seemed to himself to be getting some
sort of clue to the reason of the strange look that had been puzzling
him all the day: the man must be a monomaniac; but what was his
monomania?

It was nearly five o'clock; the short day was drawing in, and the
church began to fill with shadows, while the curious noises--the
muffled footfalls and distant talking voices that had been perceptible
all day--seemed, no doubt because of the fading light and the
consequently quickened sense of hearing, to become more frequent
and insistent. 
The sacristan began for the first time to show signs of hurry and
impatience. He heaved a sigh of relief when camera and note-book
were finally packed up and stowed away, and hurriedly beckoned
Dennistoun to the western door of the church, under the tower. It was
time to ring the Angelus. A few pulls at the reluctant rope, and the
great bell Bertrande, high in the tower, began to speak, and swung her
voice up among the pines and down to the valleys, loud with
mountain-streams, calling the dwellers on those lonely hills to
remember and repeat the salutation of the angel to her whom he called
Blessed among women. With that a profound quiet seemed to fall for
the first time that day upon the little town, and Dennistoun and the
sacristan went out of the church.

On the doorstep they fell into conversation.

'Monsieur seemed to interest himself in the old choir-books in the
sacristy.'

'Undoubtedly. I was going to ask you if there were a library in the
town.' 
'No, monsieur; perhaps there used to be one belonging to the Chapter,
but it is now such a small place--' Here came a strange pause of
irresolution, as it seemed; then, with a sort of plunge, he went on: 'But
if monsieur is amateur des vieux livres, I have at home something that
might interest him. It is not a hundred yards.'

At once all Dennistoun's cherished dreams of finding priceless
manuscripts in untrodden corners of France flashed up, to die down
again the next moment. It was probably a stupid missal of Plantin's
printing, about 1580. Where was the likelihood that a place so near
Toulouse would not have been ransacked long ago by collectors?
However, it would be foolish not to go; he would reproach himself for
ever after if he refused. So they set off. On the way the curious
irresolution and sudden determination of the sacristan recurred to
Dennistoun, and he wondered in a shamefaced way whether he was
being decoyed into some purlieu to be made away with as a supposed
rich Englishman. He contrived, therefore, to begin talking with his
guide, and to drag in, in a rather clumsy fashion, the fact that he
expected two friends to join him early the next morning. To his
surprise, the announcement seemed to relieve the sacristan at once of 
some of the anxiety that oppressed him.

'That is well,' he said quite brightly--'that is very well. Monsieur will
travel in company with his friends: they will be always near him. It is
a good thing to travel thus in company--sometimes.'

The last word appeared to be added as an afterthought and to bring
with it a relapse into gloom for the poor little man.

They were soon at the house, which was one rather larger than its
neighbours, stone-built, with a shield carved over the door, the shield
of Alberic de Mauléon, a collateral descendant, Dennistoun tells me,
of Bishop John de Mauléon. This Alberic was a Canon of Comminges
from 1680 to 1701. The upper windows of the mansion were boarded
up, and the whole place bore, as does the rest of Comminges, the
aspect of decaying age.

Arrived on his doorstep, the sacristan paused a moment.

'Perhaps,' he said, 'perhaps, after all, monsieur has not the time?' 
'Not at all--lots of time--nothing to do till tomorrow. Let us see what it
is you have got.'

The door was opened at this point, and a face looked out, a face far
younger than the sacristan's, but bearing something of the same
distressing look: only here it seemed to be the mark, not so much of
fear for personal safety as of acute anxiety on behalf of another.
Plainly the owner of the face was the sacristan's daughter; and, but for
the expression I have described, she was a handsome girl enough. She
brightened up considerably on seeing her father accompanied by an
able-bodied stranger. A few remarks passed between father and
daughter of which Dennistoun only caught these words, said by the
sacristan: 'He was laughing in the church,' words which were
answered only by a look of terror from the girl.

But in another minute they were in the sitting-room of the house, a
small, high chamber with a stone floor, full of moving shadows cast
by a wood-fire that flickered on a great hearth. Something of the
character of an oratory was imparted to it by a tall crucifix, which
reached almost to the ceiling on one side; the figure was painted of the
natural colours, the cross was black. Under this stood a chest of some 
age and solidity, and when a lamp had been brought, and chairs set,
the sacristan went to this chest, and produced therefrom, with growing
excitement and nervousness, as Dennistoun thought, a large book,
wrapped in a white cloth, on which cloth a cross was rudely
embroidered in red thread. Even before the wrapping had been
removed, Dennistoun began to be interested by the size and shape of
the volume. 'Too large for a missal,' he thought, 'and not the shape of
an antiphoner; perhaps it may be something good, after all.' The next
moment the book was open, and Dennistoun felt that he had at last lit
upon something better than good. Before him lay a large folio, bound,
perhaps, late in the seventeenth century, with the arms of Canon
Alberic de Mauléon stamped in gold on the sides. There may have
been a hundred and fifty leaves of paper in the book, and on almost
every one of them was fastened a leaf from an illuminated manuscript.
Such a collection Dennistoun had hardly dreamed of in his wildest
moments. Here were ten leaves from a copy of Genesis, illustrated
with pictures, which could not be later than A.D. 700. Further on was
a complete set of pictures from a Psalter, of English execution, of the
very finest kind that the thirteenth century could produce; and,
perhaps best of all, there were twenty leaves of uncial writing in Latin,
which, as a few words seen here and there told him at once, must 
